Update user manual for scaladoc (#12083)
lampepfl/dotty: docs/docs/usage/scaladoc/settings.md

---
title: Scaladoc settings
---

# {{page.title}}

> You can find brief information included in this chapter while calling scaladoc with `-help` flag. However it can be a little tricky if one uses sbt `doc` task.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter lists the configuration options that can be used when calling scaladoc. Some of the information shown here can be found by calling scaladoc with the `-help` flag.
```

Author: Fix

## Parity with scaladoc for Scala 2

Scaladoc has been rewritten from scratch and some of the features turned out to be useless in the new context.

> If you want to know what is current state of compatibility with scaladoc old flags, you can visit this issue for tracking [progress](https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty/issues/11907).

Reviewer: See my comment on that issue, I think we should move it to the migration guide: https://github.com/scala/docs.scala-lang/tree/main/_overviews/scala3-migration

Author: Do you think we should move it (and remove it here) or just update migration guide with similar notice?

Author: I can do it any way, of course, just let me know

Reviewer: I think eventually we want to move the content of dotty.epfl.ch into docs.scala-lang.org. But this page (settings.md) should still contain this sentence with a link to the matrix. However, the matrix itself should be moved from a github issue to a page in the migration guide. Let me know if I’m not clear :)

Reviewer: I’m adding a note here to not forget to update this link after https://github.com/scala/docs.scala-lang/pull/2012 is merged.

## Providing settings

> Scaladoc accepts settings provided as a string, e. g. `scaladoc -d output -project my-project target/scala-3.0.0-RC2/classes` or, if called from sbt,
> update the value of `Compile / doc / scalacOptions`, e. g. `Compile / doc / scalacOptions ++= Seq("-d", "output", "-project", "my-project")`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Supply scaladoc settings as command-line arguments, e.g., `scaladoc -d output -project my-project target/scala-3.0.0-RC2/classes`. If called from sbt,
update the value of `Compile / doc / scalacOptions`, e. g. `Compile / doc / scalacOptions ++= Seq("-d", "output", "-project", "my-project")`
```

Author: Fixed

## Overview of all available settings

##### -project
The name of the project. To provide compatibility with Scala2 aliases with `-doc-title`

##### -project-version
The current version of your project that appears in a top left corner. To provide compatibility with Scala2 aliases with `-doc-version`

##### -project-logo
The logo of your project that appears in a top left corner. To provide compatibility with Scala2 aliases with `-doc-logo`

##### -project-footer
The string message that appears in a footer section. To provide compatibility with Scala2 aliases with `-doc-footer`

##### -comment-syntax

> The default syntax of comments. Defaults to markdown however wikisyntax can be used.

Author: Rephrased

##### -revision
Revision (branch or ref) used to build project project. Useful with sourcelinks to prevent them from pointing always to the newest master that is subject to changes.

##### -source-links
Source links provide a mapping between file in documentation and code repository.

> Accepted formats:
> \<sub-path>=\<source-link>
> \<source-link>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accepted formats:

- \<sub-path>=\<source-link>
- \<source-link>
```

Author: Fixed

where <source-link> is one of following:
 - `github://<organization>/<repository>[/revision][#subpath]`
     will match https://github.com/$organization/$repository/\[blob|edit]/$revision\[/$subpath]/$filePath\[$lineNumber]
     when revision is not provided then requires revision to be specified as argument for scaladoc
 - `gitlab://<organization>/<repository>`
     will match https://gitlab.com/$organization/$repository/-/\[blob|edit]/$revision\[/$subpath]/$filePath\[$lineNumber]
     when revision is not provided then requires revision to be specified as argument for scaladoc
 - \<scaladoc-template>

> <scaladoc-template> is a format for `doc-source-url` parameter scaladoc.

Reviewer: Do you mean that it uses the same format as doc-source-url in old scaladoc?

Author: Yeah, I tried to rephrase that one.
@pikinier20  do you have any idea how we could improve that description?

NOTE: We only supports `€{FILE_PATH_EXT}`, `€{TPL_NAME}`, `€{FILE_EXT}`,
 €{FILE_PATH}, and €{FILE_LINE} patterns

Template can defined only by subset of sources defined by path prefix represented by `<sub-path>`.
In such case paths used in templates will be relativized against `<sub-path>`

Example source links is:

> `-source-links:docs=github://lampepfl/dotty/master#docs`

Reviewer: I would put this example first (before showing all the possible syntaxes)

Author: Moved

##### -external-mappings

Mapping between regexes matching classpath entries and external documentation.

> 'regex::\[scaladoc|scaladoc|javadoc]::path' syntax is used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A mapping is of the form '\<regex>::\[scaladoc3|scaladoc|javadoc]::\<path>'. You can supply several mappings, separated by commas, as shown in the example.
```

Author: Fixed

Example external mapping is:

> `-external-mappings:.*scala.*::scaladoc3::http://dotty.epfl.ch/api/,.*java.*::javadoc::https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/`

Reviewer: In general, I would suggest showing the example before showing the syntax reference.

Reviewer: By the way, I am a bit confused that the syntax to supply some options is `-setting value`, and sometimes `-setting:value`. Would it make sense to use a uniform syntax?

Author: Fixed

Author: As far as I know, every setting should be -setting:value
@pikinier20, could you bring some more insight?

Reviewer 2: `-external-mappings` is a setting of type `Setting[List[String]]` and AFAIK the syntax for such settings is `-setting:(value,)*value` (at least we use this syntax for all settings in scaladoc)

##### -social-links

> Links to social sites. '[github|twitter|gitter|discord]::link' syntax is used. 'custom::link::white_icon_name::black_icon_name' is also allowed, in this case icons must be present in 'images/'' directory.
> 
> Example social link is:
> 
> `-social-links:github::https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty,gitter::https://gitter.im/scala/scala,twitter::https://twitter.com/scala_lang`

Reviewer: Again, I suggest putting the example first:

```suggestion
Links to social sites. For example:

`-social-links:github::https://github.com/lampepfl/dotty,gitter::https://gitter.im/scala/scala,twitter::https://twitter.com/scala_lang`

Valid values are of the form: '\[github|twitter|gitter|discord]::link'. Scaladoc also supports 'custom::link::white_icon_name::black_icon_name'. In this case icons must be present in 'images/'' directory.
```

Author: Fixed

##### -skip-by-id

Identifiers of packages or top-level classes to skip when generating documentation.

##### -skip-by-regex

Regexes that match fully qualified names of packages or top-level classes to skip when generating documentation.

##### -doc-root-content

The file from which the root package documentation should be imported.

##### -author

> Include authors.

Reviewer: Could you elaborate? Where will the authors be included?

Author: Fixed

Reviewer: Cool, thanks for the clarification! Maybe remove this line (102)?

Reviewer: Should we remove line 102?

Author: I'll remove it then

Source links provide a mapping between file in documentation and code repository.

Accepted formats:
\<sub-path>=\<source-link>
\<source-link>

> where <source-link> is one of following:

Reviewer 3: backslash?

Reviewer: The line 46 does not render correctly.

Author: So does line 55, my bad. Thanks for staying alert :D 
Fixed
